---
layout: default
title: Essay test
---

# Modular News and Mobile Devices### AbstractTraditional journalism undergoes massive revenue losses each year, but an emerging—currently untapped—mobile news audience holds considerable promise. We propose a modular approach to selling news that meets supply with demand. A possible implementation requires considerable collaboration with the field of computational journalism. A solution would not only benefit traditional and computational journalists, but would also greatly improve the news experience of readers.

<!--excerpt-->### IntroductionThe field of journalism is at a crossroads. For decades, traditional print media dominated the journalistic arena. But the advent of new digital technologies is threatening traditional media’s supremacy. “The rise of the Internet as a popular medium has led to a substantial increase in available channels for information” (Bruns and Highfield 15). Additionally, Internet applications provide easily searchable platforms for jobs, real estate, and advertisements, thus undermining the existing business model of conventional newspapers (15). The shift towards Internet media has led to a decline in the newspaper industry and traditional journalism as a whole.The decline in traditional journalism is troublesome to Internet media as well. A significant portion of digital journalism is based on the aggregation and commentary of stories published by traditional outlets. If traditional journalism withers, then digital journalism cannot survive. A solution, therefore, is not support of one form of media over the other. The solution lies in the collaboration between traditional journalism and its new digital parallels. Specifically, this paper will focus on a relatively new field called computational journalism.Computational journalism is a result of digital and computational knowledge being applied to journalistic issues. News sorting algorithms such as those used by Facebook’s trending column is one example of computational journalism. In the past, there have been multiple instances of conflict between computational and traditional journalism. When collaborative solutions were applied, however, both parties benefited. In 2005, the Agence France-Press (AFP) sued Google over the use of copyrighted material by Google News, a news story aggregator (Cozens). Eventually, the two groups came to a symbiotic relationship. AFP benefited from increased advertisement revenue while Google News obtained more comprehensive usage rights over AFP content. Even Google’s C.E.O., Eric Schmidt, is a proponent of journalistic collaboration. He writes, “I certainly don't believe that the Internet will mean the death of news. Through innovation and technology, it can endure with newfound profitability and vitality. Video didn't kill the radio star. It created a whole new additional industry” (Schmidt). Collaboration often leads to desirable solutions. In a larger scope, collaboration has the potential to lead to substantial remodeling that benefits traditional journalists, computational journalists, and everyone in between.### Computational JournalismThe new discipline termed computational journalism is part of journalism’s ongoing trend towards the digital. Professor Ifran Essa, who is credited with coining the term, describes computation journalism’s aim as the study of “‘both computation and journalism in unison, with the goal of understanding how both have evolved and how in recent times citizens create, consume, share, and comment on news and all related information around them’” (Violino). More concretely, James Hamilton, director of the DeWill Wallace Center for Media and Democracy at Duke University, views computational journalism “‘as the combination of data, algorithms, and knowledge from social science to yield information that can supplement and, in the future, substitute for part of journalism's watchdog function’” (Violino). By nature, computational journalism is a field that encompasses a wide range of potential applications. Most implementations are still yet to be explored. Hamilton envisions that in the future, computational journalists will be able to mine vast amounts of data to observe statistical anomalies that alert them to possible investigative stories. A practical example of this is to input a variety of financial forms, court records, legislative hearings, meeting notes, and email data into an algorithm designed to detect patterns. A computational journalist observing these patterns can look for anomalies that signal suspicious behavior of someone—a government official for example. Investigative journalism can then take over and decided whether or not there is a story to write.Another application of computational journalism, the one this paper will focus on, includes aggregator sites such as Google News. These sites curate stories from the vast Internet repository of news using algorithms that account for a multitude of factors. Typical variables such as a user’s age, gender, and geographical location are accounted for. But with access to immense amounts of personal data, sites such as Google News can also mine a user’s browsing history to extract his or her hobbies, shopping habits, political affiliation, and virtually any information that the user communicates online. The resulting web page is similar to the front page of a newspaper—only it is computationally tailored towards a specific individual.### Evolution of the Newspaper Business ModelThe newspaper industry as a whole is still declining. Between 2012 and 2013, total revenue was down by 2.6% (NAA). Revenue from traditional print advertising, which constitutes about half of total revenue, decreased by nearly 9% in the past year. A compelling development in the newspaper industry is the increase in revenue from digital channels. Revenue from digital advertising, circulation, and marketing rose an impressive 5.8% in the past year, but digital revenue only accounts for 12% of total industry revenue. What’s more compelling, however, is the 77% jump in mobile advertising revenue. Although it makes up less than 1% of total revenue, the mobile platform of journalism possess remarkable potential for growth.Mobile platforms include smartphones, laptops, tablet computers, and even novel devices such as smart watches. 44% of U.S. adults own a smartphone, of whom 62% read news on their devices on a weekly basis (PEJ). Therefore, the population of mobile news-consuming Americans is approximately 80 million. With so many mobile users, one would expect that mobile advertising revenue could amount to more than 1% of total revenue. The issue is that only 9% of mobile users pay for digital-only news subscriptions. Since the proportion of mobile users is only going to get larger, newspapers must devise new strategies for monetizing the mobile news market. Purely using view-based and click-based digital advertisements is not enough to make up for total revenue losses. Additionally, the precipitous decline of print revenue means that newspapers will gradually shift focus away from print circulation. ### Reluctance to Pay for Digital NewsNearly every major newspaper in the country has implemented digital outlets for their news. Websites are a bare minimum, but per-page-view advertising on the Internet nets far less revenue than in print (NAA). Newspapers have experimented with a variety of digital subscription options. The New York Times, for example, allows users to view ten articles for free each month. In order to view more, the user must pay a subscription fee of about $15 a month—similar to print subscription pricing. But users can delete the site’s cookies from their web browser, which bypasses this article limit, also called a paywall. If digital users do not want to pay for their news, they can easily circumvent any paywalls that newspapers construct.This leads us to a more central issue: why do people refuse to pay for news online? The answer lies in core Internet culture. Most websites provide free services and make money through advertising. Internet users, therefore, expect services to be free of charge on the Internet. Additionally, widespread piracy allows users to obtain paid content with questionable legality. The vast quantities of outlets that exist on the Internet make it disadvantageous for a user to pay in order to subscribe to a single outlet. For example, a certain user may enjoy reading the World News section of the New York Times while following blogs and participating in Internet forums for news about his or her sports and hobbies.In order for users to want to pay for news, the product they pay for must justify the cost. This means that the subscription, mobile application, or delivery method must provide higher quality content, require less effort to obtain, and provide a favorable user experience. Most major newspapers already offer mobile apps, such as the New York Times’ “NYTimes - Breaking News.” Theoretically, one would expect mobile app offerings to encourage more people to pay for news. Merely building an application, however, is not enough to get people to pay for it. The app must be well designed—easy to use, lacking bugs, resource efficient, and visually appealing. A cursory glance at user reviews on Google’s mobile application store point to the app’s instability, frequent bugs, and unappealing design (Google). A significant number of users reported experiencing battery drain and even device overheating. The New York Times app can be improved, yet the subpar quality of their app is further indication of how inexperienced traditional newspapers are in the new, digital arena.### Borrowing From Successful Mobile ApplicationsIn order to meet the complex demands of mobile news consumers, newspapers may consider borrowing monetization strategies from other successful mobile applications. In the past few years, mobile advertisements have been netting less and less revenue. Instead, 76% of all revenue in the Apple App Store is from in-app purchases, or IAP’s (Jones). Particularly, free apps that offer IAP’s net the largest revenue when compared to completely free apps and completely paid apps. The best business strategy for mobile apps is to offer a free service, but make access to upgrades and additional features a premium—a freemium app.Newspapers are already trying to offer freemium options. The New York Times is free for ten articles, but to read more, users must pay $15 a month, every month. For mobile users who are accustomed to 99-cent IAP’s, such a high subscription fee to a single service is unpalatable. Additionally, since so many sources exist, paying a hefty premium for access to a single source is an outdated practice.### Modular NewsTo adapt to the new, digital user base, newspapers need to come up with a new digital subscription system. Modular news is a potential method. Instead of basing subscription pricing off of the entire newspaper’s contents, companies can sell news modules that consist of single sections. As a result, the World News module or the Political News module can be marketed at reduced cost. This solves several problems. First, it makes buying news more palatable for users. The lowered pricing resembles the existing IAP model in which most purchases are in the realm of $0.99. Modular news also matches supply to demand. Even for print newspapers, it is uncommon for someone to read every single section. Readers simply have different interests. With modular news, users can pick and choose exactly what topics they want to subscribe to. Therefore, they avoid paying for sections that they would not normally read. Modular news also lends well to mobile applications. Whereas a traditional newspaper is laid out over a relatively large spatial area, mobile users are confined to seeing only their device’s usable screen area. This makes traditional cover pages impossible. Instead, a mobile application can present a feed of headlines with descriptors that users can scroll through. Modules can be pieced together in this feed to create a seamless flow of stories that takes over the cover page’s role. Finally, as users are more likely to pay for modular subscriptions, newspapers have the potential to gain substantial revenue. Most people who currently pay for the complete subscription may continue to pay for their subscription. Yet users who normally only read a few articles from specific sections or use means of bypassing the paywall are much more inclined to purchasing a modular subscription. Modular news does not aim to completely solve the newspaper revenue problem. At this point, the current mobile news landscape is so underdeveloped that any intermediate solution that brings revenue should be considered.### Computational CollaborationModular subscriptions are beneficial to both the news producer and the news consumer, but the means of selling the subscriptions are still undiscovered. We expect consumers to purchase news modules from a variety of sources, so any attempt by individual newspapers to sell modules would be unwieldy. Computational approaches, then, are fairly well suited to handling this exchange. Currently, news aggregators such as Google News use computational algorithms to compile news sources for users. If newspapers decide to sell modular news, however, these news aggregators can serve as middlemen between the producer and the consumer by directly incorporating the modules into the reader’s feed. The user can buy modules from a variety of traditional journalistic outlets. The aggregator then takes stories from the modules, in addition to the previously available free stories, and constructs a comprehensive news feed for the user based on algorithms.In addition, news aggregators can use a user’s click history to recommend modules to purchase. This type of user-personalization already exists with free-of-charge news. Many of the critics of news aggregators claim that since much of the news comes from blogs and other republished sources, the resulting news feed is low quality. By augmenting these lower quality, tertiary news sources with traditional journalistic content in the form of modules, users can experience the personalization of a news aggregator with the quality implied by traditional journalism.Since news aggregators and other forms of computational journalism are still relatively new, there is much room for growth. Google News’ head of product, Richard Gingras advocates the “continued evolution” (Garber) of both Google’s product and journalism as a whole. In the next phase of journalism, we can expect to see “continued evolution of the algorithmic approach to address the changing ecosystem itself—in some ways subtle, and in other ways, going forward, likely more profound.” In the world of modern journalism, change is inevitable, and some of the biggest changes have yet to come.### ConclusionAs digital technologies continue to evolve, journalism is evolving with it. Traditional journalism has failed to evolve fast enough in the past few years, which resulted in significant drops in revenue and innumerable bankruptcies. There is, however, enormous potential for growth in new markets such as the mobile news arena. Current implementations fail to account for the new digital purchasing culture. They also fail to take advantage of developing technologies such as those proposed by the field of computational journalism. A modular approach to selling news allows supply to match demand, therefore giving the newspapers the revenues they need while allowing readers to enjoy quality content with their mobile, digital devices. Major collaboration between multiple newspapers and computational journalistic organizations is necessary before any modular news delivery can be realized. The technologies and ideas surrounding news in the digital age are mostly untried. Thousands of other solutions have yet to be invented. Journalism as a whole has multiple paths to choose from, and collaboration with computation and other new technologies seems to be key to its evolution.### Works CitedBruns, Axel, and Tim Highfield. "Blogs, Twitter, and Breaking News: The Produsage of Citizen Journalism." Ed. Rebecca Ann. Lind. Produsing Theory in a Digital World: The Intersection of Audiences and Production in Contemporary Theory. New York: Peter Lang, 2012. 15-33. Print.Cohen, Sarah, James T. Hamilton, and Fred Turner. "Computational Journalism." Communications of the ACM 54.10 (2011): 66-71. Print.This paper provides a comprehensive overview of computational journalism. The authors also speculate about the watchdog potential of future applications of this type of journalism.Cozens, Claire. "AFP Sues Google over Copyrighted Content." The Guardian. The Guardian, 21 Mar. 2005. Web. 14 Dec. 2014. <http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2005/mar/21/media.newmedia>.Details the lawsuit between Google and AFP.Garber, Megan. "Google News at 10: How the Algorithm Won Over the News Industry." The Atlantic. Atlantic Media Company, 20 Sept. 2012. Web. 14 Dec. 2014. <http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/09/google-news-at-10-how-the-algorithm-won-over-the-news-industry/262641/2/>.Megan Garber analyzes the origins of Google News, the conflict between it and traditional media, and how they are currently working on collaboration. The article also contains a few quotes by a Google project leader about the future of digital and computational journalism.Google. "NYTimes - Breaking News." Google Play. Google, 1 Jan. 2014. Web. 14 Dec. 2014. <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.nytimes.android&hl=en>.Jones, Chuck. "Apps With In-App Purchase Generate the Highest Revenue." Forbes. Forbes Magazine, 31 Mar. 2013. Web. 14 Dec. 2014.Basic data to show success of apps that use an in-app purchase strategy. Mitchell, Amy, Tom Rosenstiel, and Leah Christian. "Future of Mobile News." Pew Research Journalism Project. Pew Research Center, 30 Sept. 2012. Web. 14 Dec. 2014. <http://www.journalism.org/2012/10/01/future-mobile-news/>.NAA. "Business Model Evolving, Circulation Revenue Rising." Newspaper Association of America. NAA, 18 Apr. 2014. Web. 14 Dec. 2014. <http://www.naa.org/Trends-and-Numbers/Newspaper-Revenue/Newspaper-Media-Industry-Revenue-Profile-2013.aspx>.Schmidt, Eric. "How Google Can Help Newspapers." The Wall Street Journal. Dow Jones & Company, 1 Dec. 2009. Web. 14 Dec. 2014.Eric Schmidt (CEO of Google) explains how he genuinely wants to help the newspapers survive. Violino, Bob. "How Computing Is Changing Journalism." Communications of the ACM. ACM, 7 July 2007. Web. 14 Dec. 2014. <http://cacm.acm.org/news/32982-how-computing-is-changing-journalism/fulltext>.Violino provides a brief overview of the new field of computational journalism, and speculates about its potential. He also gives background information on the origins of computational journalism. This source is used to summarize computational journalism in the paper. 